Friends, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization.
Using media both old and new to share the faith on every continent,
and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and His Church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today, we invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the Gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you. Friends, for this 19th Sunday of Ordinary Time, I want to focus on
We're right in on reading number two, which is from the letter to the Hebrews. And it's one of my favorite passages in the New Testament because it's
It's a great biblical description of faith.
And I stand with Paul Tillich, the Protestant theologian, who said,
Faith is the most misunderstood word in the religious vocabulary.
Yes, I think especially true today.
When you talk to people who are especially critical of religion, what do you hear?
Well, you know, there's reason and there's evidence-based thinking and there's science on the one hand. And then you've got this thing saying over here, which I guess is, it's
accepting things on the basis of no evidence. It's believing any old nonsense. It's naive Tay. It's superstition. So, you know, look, I'm for science. I'm not for faith.
of faith.
I always want to tear my hair out when I hear a versus event.
Because that,
It has nothing to do with what the Bible means by faith.
Superstition. Superstition.
A credulity naivete.
Those are all things that are beneath reason.
They're shy of reason. They don't reach the level of reason. And the church is against those things. Now, why? Why? Because we believe that Jesus is the Lord.
He's the Logos. He's the logic. He's the mind of God made flesh, right?
Therefore, what's illogical is opposed to Christ.
So please, especially parents, maybe teachers, grandparents listening to me, whenever you hear someone talking about faith that way, just know
No, automatically have my face and voice appear to you saying, that's not good.
what we mean by faith.
So,
What is faith on a biblical reading?
Can I begin at a perhaps surprising place?
As I record these words just a few weeks ago, we had the 4th of July.
And one thing I love to watch in the fourth July, I call it up on YouTube or something, is the scene from that wonderful HBO series on John Adams.
Remember, starring the great Paul Giamatti as John Adams. It's based on David McCullough's book.
Anyway, the scene I love to watch is they're in the...
In the independence hall.
and they're preparing you know to take the vote on independence and it's a thunderstorm going on it's dramatic thunder and lightning and up gets John Adams and gives this this
Disturbing speech.
About what independence will mean and why they should do it.
But what's cleared everyone in that room
Adams especially, but everyone in that room.
They knew what a risky undertaking this was.
Yes. Indeed, at the end of the Declaration, we find that we pledge our lives, our fortunes, our sacred honor. That's not just me.
I don't know. Patriotic boilerplate. They meant it.
They knew in signing that document into clearing independence,
they were marked men.
That if the British found them, they would be imprisoned, certainly probably hanged.
What a risky moment that was.
Yeah. Did they see the future? Yeah, to some degree. In fact, Adams is rather remarkable in how he envisioned the future.
You know, what would happen if that day was celebrated?
But could they possibly have seen everything that would come, everything that might come, the dangers in their way? No way, no way.
Rather, rather,
They risked at that moment. They took a leap.
The wrist,
And from that risk,
It came our country, and that's no exaggeration. That's simply the case. Were those men in 1776 unwilling to take a great risk, a leap of faith,
Go leap into the dark.
Our country wouldn't have happened.
you know, ah after i watched that scene, of course, i got drawn into it and i started watching more and more of it and i watched one of the episodes of of the series.
That shows
A couple years later, I think it was 1778, Johnny Adams and his young son, John Quincy Adams.
are making their way.
It's across the stormy Atlantic. It's an early spring, 1778. And it's a very, very, very
Very dangerous trip. Now, why? Well, he was sent by Congress to help Benjamin Franklin as an ambassador in Paris.
Well, then they were on the leaky boat crossing the Atlantic, stormy North Atlantic in the late 18th century. It was in itself a dangerous proposition.
But more to it, there were British ships all over the place. In fact, they encountered one of them. They had to fight it off. They fought the elements, the mast broke, etc. Adams's
And the British were not the only ones who were killed.
he, adams, would be captured and probably hanged.
What a risky journey that was across the Atlantic.
And when they left that night, here's Adams and his 12-year-old son.
When they got on that boat and started that trip, could they possibly have seen
What would happen, what might happen?
Well, to some degree, but for the most part, no, it was a great,
Risk
There's a lovely moment, too, a little bit later in the story. John Quincy is now 14. He's learned French. Yeah.
He's been living in Paris with his father.
And they find out that there's a need of a secretary to the ambassador to Russia. And the language of the court is French.
And so John says, "Well, my son John Quincy, he knows French."
So, yeah.
The little boy, he's 14.
He says to his father, I hear it's cold.
in Russia and his father says well you're a man from Massachusetts shouldn't bother you
Off you go, Godspeed. Off goes this 14-year-old kid.
Taking this enormous risk
What came from these great adventures? Well, the development of our country. John Quinzianum becomes the sixth president and one of the most cultivated of our presidency.
our presidents, partially because of this marvelous training he got from his father. And from the risks he was willing to take as a young man.
Look, everybody at,
Almost every story.
of the hero's journey.
Whether it's
And Spider-Man, whether it's Star Wars, whether it's Lord of the Rings, you know,
We love that story, don't we? We tell it over and over again.
They tend to have the same pattern.
Which is someone beginning
In sort of cozy domesticity.
Think of, um,
1968, Peter Parker, right, with his aunt and uncle in Brooklyn, wherever they were, in this little cozy apartment. Right.
Think of Luke Skywalker with his aunt and uncle.
I'm on this distant planet living a kind of very ordinary life.
Or the best example, I think, is the hobbit and the Lord of the Rings.
Bilbo.
in his hobbit hole. And the hobbit hole is really cozy. You know, nice little furniture. There's doilies on the tables. There are books on the table.
Books on the shelves. There's lots of food. Bilbo's a little heavy. He's well fed. There's a fireplace going everywhere.
Cozy, cozy, cozy, easy life.
And then breaking into that place comes.
It's this invitation.
To adventure.
The same with Frodo and the Lord of the Rings. He's in his little hot hole. Same thing.
And then he's summoned.
To adventure.
It's difficult. Difficult
Mm-hmm
Much rather stay home.
Words comfy warm safe
Yeah, absolutely. Think of John Adams, you know, that day in 1778. He could have said to Congress, you know, I don't know.
I'm just not going to risk it. It's too much.
to cross the Atlantic.
I'm going to stay home. Look, I'll support you with my writing and all that, but I'm going to stay home with my family.
But no, he ventured out.
And so,
Peter Parker and Luke Skywalker.
Invited to adventure and by that they become the heroes they were meant to be.
Same with Bilbo, same with Frodo.
They have to leave a habit hole
Go on a
Risky adventure
And thereby become the heroes they were meant to be, make the contribution they're made to make.
now think about this everybody.
the the hero.
He begins in this familiar space that he knows. He's comfortable. He knows that space.
"'If he never risked, never risked,' he said,
Nothing new would be gained.
But the risk, the going out into the dark,
Allows
More light now.
To go into that space.
And there's more for us.
And their descendants to enjoy.
But if we stay in that little domestic space, then we'll never make any further progress.
We always need heroes.
To draw us on to adventure.
Okay. Now, with all that in mind, from John Adams to Frodo Baggins, okay?
Listen now
To the letter to the Hebrews.
Seeds.
Oh, means believing in any old stupid thing. No, that's not what faith means, everybody, okay?
Faith
Is the realization of what is hoped for
The evidence of things
Not seen.
Did John Adams
See certain things, yeah, when he took that great risk.
"'But was there much he didn't see?'
But,
Hoped for.
Indeed, the invention of this new nation.
Frodo Baggins leaving the hobbit hole.
Were there things that he kind of
He grasped or glimpsed maybe, but most of it he didn't see.
But there was something he was called to hope for.
Now, listen further.
Who in the Bible
Who in the Bible is the great figure of faith?
Abraham,
And so the author says,
By faith
Abraham obeyed when he was called.
To go out to a place.
That he was to receive as an inheritance.
He went out.
Not knowing where he was
To go.
By faith
He sojourned into the promised land.
As in a foreign country.
That's what faith means everybody
Again
Abraham.
By the way, who was 75 when the story began? 75 years old.
75, most 75-year-olds aren't really up for a big adventure, right? They're really happy with a hobbit hole, right?
They're really happy with cozy, safe domesticity.
Abraham though
Obeyed.
When he was called,
to go out to a place he was to receive as an inheritance. So the Lord made a promise.
Abraham.
Go,
Go to this promised land. Follow.
and I will make of you a great nation.
Well, heck, did he understand that perfectly? Did he see exactly how that was going to happen? Did he know where this land was?
"'Hardly?'
Hardly.
I think John Adams. I think Frodo Baggins. I think...
Any hero,
But he went,
In this trusting spirit
And because he went, and this is no exaggeration,
Because he went,
I'm standing here today speaking to you about the God of Israel.
See, it was the faith that...
of Abraham.
that gave him the courage to go out.
To discover the promised land.
To give rise to the chosen people.
And from that land, that people,
It came Jesus. And from Jesus comes the faith that has gone out all over the world. Amen.
He could barely have understood what the Lord was promising, but he...
He believed it. He trusted in it.
He was willing to go on an adventure.
Now, young people, especially, listen to me.
And now grandparents, send this to your grandchildren.
That's what faith means.
I don't think of religious people as all these nice old funny duddies. It's the opposite. Yeah.
It's the opposite.
Religious people, people with faith,
100%. Are those who are up for an adventure, right?
They're willing to follow God, yes, even into the darkness.
Trusting in what he's showing them.
the great Ignatius of Loyola
Had as his model
Semper Mayur.
Always greater.
Always more never be satisfied with where you are
Always be ready for adventure.
Or think of Pierre Giorgio Frassati as I record these words he'll be canonized in a few months.
his great model.
He was a mountain climber.
It means to the heights.
To the heights.
Is mountain climbing dangerous? You bet it is. Easier to camp and stay in one place? You bet.
But no no no they're so loud too
Let's go up to the heights
People of faith, they're not fuddy-duddies stay at home, you know.
And there's certainly not people that believe in any old nonsense. That's not it.
There are people who listen
to the Word of God.
And are willing to follow that word, yes, even into the darkness.
On a great adventure.
Abraham's our father in faith
Let's follow them.
And God bless you.
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron.
For more resources from Bishop Barron, please visit wordonfire.org.